OK so let's take a look at a third normal form which is going to be the highest level of normalization
that we're going to look up.
And 90 percent of the time this will be the level of normalization that your database will follow.
So for tables to be in third normal form they must conform to second normal form and also every column
that is not a primary key must only be dependent on the whole of the primary key.
So this sounds a little bit like second normal form but every column that's not a primary key must only
be dependent on the whole of the primary key.
So any column which is not a primary key cannot depend on any other column which is not a primary key.
So this sounds pretty complicated.
So let's look at this with an example.
Say we have a table which is storing data on store people for every subject and every year so every
year the school runs a competition to see who the star people with for each subject.
So we have two subjects we have the year we have the student which was the stop people.
And we also have to stop people's date of birth.
So let's check if this is in third normal form both to do that we have to check that it's in second
normal form and to do that we have to check whether it's in first normal form.
So is this table and first normal form.
Well we can see we have no Jupiter rows of data.
Every row here is unique.
We have only one entry for each column so each column only has one value for each row.
And we also have a primary key.
So our primary key is subjects plus year.
So we can't just have subjects because if you see here we have math 2015 math 2016 and we have a different
star people for each year.
And similarly we can't just use year because we can see we have 2015 and two three times 2016 and twice
this year is not unique.
We need the subjects plus the year to be able to uniquely identify each row within this table.
So yes this table is in first normal form.
So let's check if it's in second normal form.
So now we need to check whether every column which is not a primary key.
So this stop people column the stop people date of birth is dependent on the whole of the primary key.
So first let's check stop people and see whether that depends on the hold of the primary key and you
can see that it does.
We can't just say Subject math stop people Muffie tell you to because you can see the full for a down
we have math again again we have a different style people.
We need to say math.
Plus 2015 to get Matthew Taylor and me.
And similarly we can't just say the year we come to say 2015.
Matthew Taylor because we also have 2015.
William Edwards 2015 Georgina's SIMON So we need the subjects plus the year to be able to say who the
star people is.
So they star people call them does depend on the whole of the primary key and not just on separate columns
that make up the primary key and it's the same for the star people date of birth.
We can't say what the date of birth is if we only have the subject so we only have the year we need
to hold up the primary.
We need the subject plus the year to be able to say what the stop people date of birth is.
So both of these columns which are not primary keys do depend on the whole of the primary key.
So we can say that this table is in second normal form.
So now we need to check whether this table was in third normal form.
So to be in third normal form it needs to be in second normal form plus any non primary key column must
be dependent on only the whole of the primary key.
So first let's check out all people mean can see yes this only depends on the primary key subject plus
year.
So it doesn't matter about any other column in this table.
The star people just depends on which subject some which year it was.
So now let's check stop people.
Date of Birth.
Well we know that this does depend on subject plus years.
So the whole of the primary key.
But really it also depends on the style of people.
So the date of birth of the star people obviously depends on who the star people is.
So you have this two step dependency between the whole of the primary key subject plus here and people
date of birth.
So the star pupil is dependent on the whole of the primary key and then the star pupil date of birth
is dependent on the star people.
So we can say that this table is in third normal form because the star people date of birth also depends
on a column which is a known primary key column the star people.
So this table is not in third normal form.
So now the question is how do we make this table follow a third normal form and to do that we need to
split this table into two separate tables.
So the first table was going to look like this.
We have the subject on the year and then we just have to stop people.
So let's check whether this is in first normal form.
So is it in first normal form.
Well yes.
We have no repeated rows of data.
Are all unique.
We have no column which has more than one value for each row.
And we also have a primary K which is subject plus year.
So this table is in first form.
So now we need to check whether it's in second normal form.
So does any known primary key column depend on the whole of the primary key.
So does this stop people column depend on the whole of the primary key.
Well yes it does because we can't just tell by the subject the star people is.
We can't just tell by the year who the star people is.
We need subject plus year so we need physics.
Plus 2015 to be able to tell that it was WM-I puts And we need math plus 2016 to tell that the star
people was Benjamin long.
So this table was in second normal form.
So now we need to check whether it's inferred normal form.
So does any column which is a known primary key column depend on only the whole of the primary key.
So the obvious answer is yes because we only have one column which is non-primary K the star pupil.
So it can only depend on the whole of the primary key.
There's no other non-primary key columns for this column to depend on.
So yes this table is in third normal form.
So now we need to check on a table which is containing the star people's date of birth.
So here we have a table containing stop people and stop people date of birth.
So let's check whether this is in third normal form.
So is it in first normal form where you say is we have no repeated rows of data and every column only
has one value assigned to it.
And we you have a primary key and our primary key is to stop people of color.
So this uniquely identifies each role within table.
So this table was in first of all.
So in second normal form so is the style people date of birth related to the whole of the primary key
while the whole of the primary key is just one column stop people.
And yes the saw people date of birth is dependent on the style people is say yes this table is in third
normal form.
So now we need to check whether it's in normal form.
So third normal form means that any non-primary key is dependent only on the whole of the primary key.
And that's there's only one column which is non-primary key.
Yes the star pupil date of birth only depends on the primary key which is the star.
People call him.
So this table is also in third normal form.
So now our database is in third normal form.
Now as an example of a third normal form I showed you this table with stop people and stop people date
of birth but in reality you wouldn't actually even need this table because any school would already
have a student table we every single student in it.
So you could get the stop date of birth from their students table but for an example of showing you
third normal form.
I included this table as well.
So that's it for the levels of normalization.
Obviously this was a lot of information to take in.
So if you need to re watch these videos then do so.
But for now that's it for normalization.
And we can move on to the next subject.